All right guys. So for this video,
I have removed those other jobs that I
clicked on before because I'm going to use my own filters here.
I will show you how I evaluate
the different opportunities that I come across in my daily search if I'm doing it.
So like I said,
I'm only looking at intermediate and expert with a minimum of $100.
Web development, obviously Australia.
If I close filters,
that narrows it down to the 700 jobs. All right.
Out of those 700 jobs,
a small percentage might have been posted in the last 24 hours.
There's not that many jobs to go through in the last 24 hours, I would suspect.
Okay. So as I scroll down,
I'll go through the projects that are of interest to me and I'll open them up in
a new tab and I'll do my best to share with you my thought process.
So here we go.
Our website is built on weeks.
Okay. Let's have a look at that.
Create WordPress theme and copy data from archive.You might be interested in that.
WordPress developing needed for small projects.
Okay. Yeah, maybe.
Again, I'm not super fussy.
For the purpose of this video,
I'll open up a few ones that we can evaluate.
Try and get a good variety here for you guys.
WordPress expert to build full time.
So I can go through the results here.
I'm already up to 13 hours.
As you can see, if I go further,
I'm moving up to 24 hours pretty quickly.
By page even page three,
I've hit the 24-hour mark.
Okay. So for you,
you might want to have less filters so that you
can actually find more jobs within that 24-hour period.
But for me, I'm happy to take
the sniper approach rather than the shotgun approach to finding work.
Okay. So let's have a look at some of these jobs here.
I'm going to bring this down again so we can look at the tabs
and have a little squeeze at that these and evaluate them.
So the first thing I would recommend is that you
evaluate these jobs as much as the client is evaluating you.
Okay? So you don't want to be coming from the mindset of you groveling for work.
All these people are doing you a favor.
All these people have something of value for you and you're just grasping at it.
So get that mindset out of your head,
you are a value as well.
These clients are desperately looking for somebody to do a good job for them as well.
Maybe they're not desperate,
but that's the mindset that you should have.
You shouldn't come from a mindset of desperation.
If anything, you should be thinking that these clients desperately want to work with you.
So it's just good to have that mindset and
evaluate clients as much as they would evaluate you.
Actually, I did an interview with another freelancer
on my YouTube channel last year, Brett Dev.
One of the things he said was,
"When I go to interview with somebody, I'm interviewing them.
They're not interviewing me."
Switch that mental mindset around this value exchange.
So I think it goes back to that employee mindset.
There's one job and there's maybe hundreds of applicants.
So you almost feel like you got to prove yourself.
Here you obviously got to demonstrate that you can do the work.
But they're looking for somebody just as much as you're looking to get hired.
So keep that in mind when you're evaluating jobs.
So the first thing I look for,
I've got a bit of a list here;
a detailed job description.
So right now, this is not the best job description because it's one paragraph,
haven't split it out into multiple paragraphs.
It's small.
If I go in and read it,
we are looking for a talented designer and
developer to an existing website is built on weeks.
So as I'm going through this job description,
I'm thinking to myself,
Is it clear what they're after?
Is this something that I want to do.
Is this something I can position myself well to?
As I'm reading this job description or any other for that matter,
I'm trying to find the key points where I can actually respond in my cover letter,
covering that key point and sharing why I'm a good fit for
each of these key points and overall a good fit for the project.
Now just in general,
you've got this one paragraph and you've got a pretty non detailed job title.
Website redesign and refresh.
So this project is probably is not the best example.
But if I look at the client information here,
the client has a five-star rating from three reviews, which is good.
They've spent a little bit of money,
but not a huge amount of money on the platform.
So the client looks okay.
I'd be happy to work with a client who's five-star rated.
With that level of experience,
they look like they've done a good job on the platform so far.
If I go down to the client's recent history,
I can actually see the reviews that freelancers have given this client.
So it all looks good.
All these five-star reviews,
nothing but good things to say about this client.
So in terms of evaluating the client specifically,
they look like a pretty good client.
But there's other parts that I look at as well in terms of the actual job.
One is the budget and whether they're going to pay well.
So this person is looking for expert level of freelancers.
But if you scroll down here,
you can see the fixed price that they have paid people.
It's hard to judge what the hourly is on these jobs,
the effective hourly, but you can see some of the money they've paid in the past.
That tells you how much money you can expect them to pay in the future.
If we go to the bid range, let's see.
This is a hourly job,
but the average bid on this hourly job on expert level is $17.10.
So I wouldn't be too deterred by this because maybe
your competition aren't as good as you and you shouldn't be scared off by competition.
But it is something to consider that if I applied for this job,
I would be the highest bidder by far at $50 an hour.
So maybe I would consider dropping my rate if I really wanted to work on this project to
$40 or maybe this is a sign that I'm a little bit too pricey for them.
So another section we should look at is the questions.
Right here, you can see that there's three questions that they've included here.
These are ones that you'll have the opportunity to
answer when you click submit a proposal.
Right here in this particular project,
we can see that the questions are quite generic and maybe even generated by UpWork.
So they're not very specific to this job or to this category of work.
So it shows perhaps a little bit of laziness on
the client's part to just choose generic questions.
So that is a consideration as well.
Otherwise, if they're asking
good specific questions that you feel you have a good answer to,
that's a good sign that you can actually position yourself for these jobs
by answering these questions and having a really good answer to them.
The final thing I would do with this one is check out their link.
So I would open this up in a new tab.
UpWork are going to ask you if you are willing to leave UpWork.
That's there disclaimer saying you're not on UpWork anymore, so be careful.
You can actually research more about their company and maybe you'll find
some information about them that will help you to create your proposal.
One example, sometimes they tell you
a specific problem that they're having and then they give you the website link and
you're able to actually look at the problem and advise
them on what the issue is upfront so that's a really good one as well.
But basically, that's how I would evaluate this client.
Based on all that,
I probably wouldn't bother with this one and so let's move on to the next one.
We've got create WordPress theme and copy data from Archive.org.
That's a pretty good title,
I think that's pretty specific so let's have a read of the job description here.
I actually like this job description,
I like how they've broken it out into paragraphs which
shows that they've made some effort with their grammar and making it readable,
they've told the story of what happened and what they need done.
It's pretty clear to me what the job is and that to me is a big thumbs up.
That not only it makes it easier for me to write my proposal but it
shows that these people know what they want
which is going to make it easier to work with them.
The budget is a little bit low but if I look at the client,
they've got a pretty good rating from two reviews,
they're in my location and they've spent a small amount of money so far.
Let's go down and look at their work history.
In their client history,
they've only paid freelancers $8 and $3 an hour.
What have they put the experience level for this one?
They're looking for intermediate but judging from what they've hired in the past,
they're maybe looking for somebody in more of that range.
Now, when you're looking at these rates that they
have had been charged to by previous freelancers,
make sure to look at the work that these freelancers performed as
well because if it's something low value like data entry,
maybe they're going to pay somebody $3-$5 an hour
but if it's something that's more complicated and more specialized,
maybe they'd be willing to pay more.
That's something that you can't necessarily judge but it's another factor to look at,
how much have they paid freelancers in the past?
Going back up again,
you can see the bid range.
They've put their budget as 200,
and the average bid is around that 200 mark.
If you're happy to do it for 200,
click that "Submit a Proposal" button and go straight into it.
I'm going to keep this one open because I like it.
Budget is a bit low,
but I think that everything else is pretty okay.
The only worry I'd have with
this particular client is that they're not willing to pay that much.
But again, I don't know until I speak to them and
so I think I might send a proposal for this one.
Moving onto the next one,
WordPress developer needed for a small project.
Down here we've got a job description and again,
I like that they've broken it down into tasks.
They're getting really clear with what they're after,
they've attached a screenshot.
The job description is pretty good,
the title is pretty descriptive.
If I look at the client,
they've got good reviews,
they've spent a total of 952.
If I go down here,
we can see how much they've paid freelancers in the past and for what work.
All of these fixed price jobs that are pretty low budget,
I'd have the same concern with this client as the previous client.
They seem to know what they want and they seem to have pretty good reviews
but it may not be the budget that I'm looking for.
Let's have a look at one more; front-end developer.
I wanted to build our fundraising theme.
Here and in this section,
senior level that communicates to me
that they're looking for somebody quite senior and experienced so you
need to evaluate whether you fit that criteria
of somebody who you consider senior or very experienced.
Let's have a look at what else they put here.
They use a lot of technical speak here like Pug and LESS.
I'm not familiar with Pug but I've heard of LESS before,
I don't have much experience in either Pug or LESS so I'm thinking with this one,
it may not be a perfect fit for my skills.
That's what I'm thinking with this but in terms of has the client got a budget?
He or she has paid good rates before,
they've spent over $30,000 on the platform and
they have a close to five star, perfect average review.
I think that this client will have the budget to hire somebody like me.
At my rate, I'd be on the higher end but I think they'd be willing to look at it judging
from their history but I'm not sure whether
that'd be the right fit in terms of experience.
Let's do one more and then we'll wrap up this and
talk about how to actually submit your proposal,
let's have a look at this.
Somebody has a clunky and old website for
the dance business and they want us to take a look so let's have a look at that one.
They weren't lying, their website looks pretty terrible and
old so let's see what they're after.
This person knows they want a website,
they already know they want it on WordPress,
but they want somebody who knows design.
I'm definitely more on the development side than the designer side.
Maybe they're looking for more of a designer than somebody to actually build
it or maybe they're looking for somebody to do both,
which is often the case with small clients,
they want design and development in the one go.
I like the price that they're giving it for a basic WordPress website,
that's an okay budget but
the issue with this client is that they're pretty much new to the platform.
Their payment is not verified and they have no previous reviews.
Also your competition here is going to be
50 plus proposals because they have made the job pretty enticing.
This particular client, I think I would still submit but of course,
I wouldn't work with them unless their payment is verified.
That's something that can be set up later.
I think I would still have a look at this job and make a bid,
and that's because it's pretty clear to me what they want and it's
pretty clear to me that I can do what it is they're after.
That's my thought process around evaluating four different jobs here.
What I want you to keep in mind when you're looking at any job ad is three questions.
One, am I right for this job?
Two, can I compete?
Three, do I have the answer to their problems?
Or in other words, can I position myself as the answer to their problems?
The first one, am I right for the job?
You have to evaluate that on your own personal basis,
figure out whether it's a right match for your skills,
whether you can actually deliver on that job.
Number two, in terms of can I compete?
Again, I don't want you to get too caught up on your competition
because there's a lot of low-level freelancers on UpWork
that'll send through copy and paste proposals
and they don't have the guidance that you're getting right now.
Your competition is unlikely to be that strong but even still,
you want to make sure that if the client has
a really low budget and that's what they're looking for,
you are probably not going to be able to compete with a really high hourly rate.
On a flip side, if they're looking for somebody who's really
experienced and knows all this stuff and they're paying well,
maybe you can't compete at that level.
You have to judge,
do I have a good chance at getting this job for the price I want?
The final question to answer yourself is,
can you answer their problem?
Can you communicate that you are the answer?
A lot of this goes into how much information they've given you.
If they give you a vague job description and they say,
''I want a website,'' there's some job ads out there that just say,
''I want a website.''
Well, there's not much you can say to that except for,
''I know how to make a website and I'm pretty good at it.''
So that's why this goes into the evaluation stage of looking at these jobs.
You've got to ask yourself first of all,
has the client given me enough information to be able
to figure out whether I have the answers to the problem and if so,
do I have some good answers to their problems,
and can I position myself as the answer to that problem?
Once you have that in mind,
you can go to Submit a Proposal and then in the next video,
we're going to talk about how you actually put those ideas into
a text form and send that off to your prospective client and hopefully win the job.